What is natural language processing?

Natural language processing (NLP) is the ability of a computer program to understand human language as it is spoken and written -- referred to as natural language. 
It is a component of artificial intelligence (AI).


How does natural language processing work?

NLP enables computers to understand natural language as humans do. 
Whether the language is spoken or written, natural language processing uses artificial intelligence to take real-world input, process it, 
and make sense of it in a way a computer can understand. Just as humans have different sensors -- such as ears to hear and eyes to see -- 
computers have programs to read and microphones to collect audio. And just as humans have a brain to process that input, 
computers have a program to process their respective inputs. At some point in processing, the input is converted to code that the computer can understand.

There are two main phases to natural language processing: data preprocessing and algorithm development.
Data preprocessing involves preparing and "cleaning" text data for machines to be able to analyze it. 
preprocessing puts data in workable form and highlights features in the text that an algorithm can work with. There are several ways this can be done, including:

* Tokenization. This is when text is broken down into smaller units to work with.
* Stop word removal. This is when common words are removed from text so unique words that offer the most information about the text remain.
* Lemmatization and stemming. This is when words are reduced to their root forms to process.
* Part-of-speech tagging. This is when words are marked based on the part-of speech they are -- such as nouns, verbs and adjectives.

Once the data has been preprocessed, an algorithm is developed to process it. There are many different natural language processing algorithms, 
but two main types are commonly used:

* Rules-based system. This system uses carefully designed linguistic rules. This approach was used early on in the development of natural language processing, and is still used.
* Machine learning-based system. Machine learning algorithms use statistical methods. They learn to perform tasks based on training data they are fed, 
and adjust their methods as more data is processed. Using a combination of machine learning, deep learning and neural networks, 
natural language processing algorithms hone their own rules through repeated processing and learning.